docs: react 18, streaming SSR, rsc with new apis (#33986)
vercel/next.js: docs/advanced-features/react-18/streaming.md

# Streaming SSR (Alpha)

> React 18 will include architectural improvements to React server-side rendering (SSR) performance. This means you could use `Suspense` in your React components in streaming SSR mode and React will send render them and send through HTTP streams. React server components is also an experimental feature based on streaming. Next.js will also provide server components related features along with other streaming support through `next/streaming`.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if the mention of server components above could be confusing (in that this doc does not address server components). Tried to clarify a bit:

```suggestion
React 18 will include architectural improvements to React server-side rendering (SSR) performance. This means you can use `Suspense` in your React components in streaming SSR mode and React will render them on the server and send them through HTTP streams. 

It's worth noting that another experimental feature, React Server Components, is based on streaming.  You can read more about server components related streaming APIs like `next/streaming` [here](). However, this guide focuses on basic React 18 streaming.
```

> ## Enable Streaming SSR

Reviewer: It would be good to add a high-level description of what it means to turn on streaming (because the term is pretty overloaded and possibly unclear). What actually changes if you set this flag to true?  e.g. if you add Suspense without this flag, Suspense fallbacks will be flushed once and it will be full client-side-rendering. If you turn the flag on, the suspending will actually happen on the server and content / script tags will be sent through as the boundaries resolve.

> To enable, use the experimental flag `concurrentFeatures: true`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable streaming, use the experimental flag `concurrentFeatures: true`:
```

```jsx
// next.config.js
module.exports = {
  experimental: {
    concurrentFeatures: true,
  },
}
```

## Streaming Features

### next/dynamic

> Using Dynamic import on React components by `React.lazy` have better support in React 18. Previously Next.js support dynamic import internally without require `Suspense` or `React.lazy`, Now to embrace the official APIs on React side we provide you with `options.suspense` in `next/dynamic`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic imports through `React.lazy` have better support in React 18. Previously, Next.js supported dynamic imports internally without requiring `Suspense` or `React.lazy`. Now to embrace the official APIs on the React side, we provide you with `options.suspense` in `next/dynamic`.
```

```jsx
import dynamic from 'next/dynamic'
import { lazy, Suspense } from 'react'

import Content from '../components/content'

> // These two ways are identical:

Reviewer: This is a helpful way to explain it 👍

const Profile = dynamic(() => import('./profile'), { suspense: true })
const Footer = lazy(() => import('./footer'))

export default function Home() {
  return (
    <div>
      <Suspense fallback={<Spinner />}>

>         {/* A component that uses Suspense-based */}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        {/* A component that uses Suspense */}
```

        <Content />
      </Suspense>
      <Suspense fallback={<Spinner />}>
        <Profile />
      </Suspense>
      <Suspense fallback={<Spinner />}>
        <Footer />
      </Suspense>
    </div>
  )
}
```

> Checkout [next/streaming](/docs/api-reference/next/streaming.md) for more details for building Next.js apps in streaming SSR mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out [next/streaming](/docs/api-reference/next/streaming.md) for more details for building Next.js apps in streaming SSR mode.
```

> ## Notice

Reviewer: Notice doesn't sound quite right to me. Maybe "important notes"?

```suggestion
## Important Notes
```

> ## Notice

Reviewer: Can we add another section here for migrating `next/head` and `next/script`? We should explain that using resource tags in `next/head` won't work and that `next/script` instances with "beforeInteractive" will need to be in the `Document`.

#### Data Fetching

> Currently data fetching within suspense boundaries on server side is not fully supported, which could lead to mismatching between server and client. In the short-term, please don't put data fetching within suspense.

Reviewer: I think this could also use an example of what you mean specifically by data-fetching (e.g. patterns like this won't work...)

```suggestion
Currently, data fetching within Suspense boundaries on the server side is not fully supported, which could lead to mismatching between server and client. In the short-term, please don't try data fetching within Suspense.
```

#### Styling

> Styling your components with styled-jsx or CSS modules are not supported well in streaming SSR. We're still working on them.

Reviewer: Make it a bit more positive?

```suggestion
The Next.js team is still working on support for styled-jsx and CSS modules in streaming SSR. Please stay tuned for updates!
```

# Streaming SSR (Alpha)

React 18 will include architectural improvements to React server-side rendering (SSR) performance. This means you can use `Suspense` in your React components in streaming SSR mode and React will render them on the server and send them through HTTP streams.

> It's worth noting that another experimental feature, React Server Components, is based on streaming. You can read more about server components related streaming APIs like [`next/streaming`](docs/api-reference/next/streaming.md). However, this guide focuses on basic React 18 streaming.

Author: I changed to below since it's also the api reference doc path
```
in [`next/streaming`]
```

## Enable Streaming SSR

> Enabling streaming SSR means React renders your components into streams and client continues receiving the updating fragments from server, which lets you start emitting the HTML as early as possible. You can break down your app into few smaller independent units by `Suspense`. The client will use selective hydration strategy to prioritize the components hydration which lets users interact with the them efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling streaming SSR means React renders your components into streams and the client continues receiving updates from these streams even after the initial SSR response is sent. In other words, when any suspended components resolve down the line, they are rendered on the server and streamed to the client.  With this strategy, the app can start emitting HTML even before all the data is ready, improving your app's loading performance.  As an added bonus, in streaming SSR mode, the client will also use selective hydration strategy to prioritize component hydration which based on user interaction.
```

To enable streaming SSR, set the experimental option `runtime` to either `'nodejs'` or `'edge'`:

```jsx
// next.config.js
module.exports = {
  experimental: {
    runtime: 'nodejs',
  },
}
```

This option determines the environment in which streaming SSR will be happening. When setting to `'edge'`, the server will be running entirely in the [Edge Runtime](https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/edge-runtime).

## Streaming Features

### next/dynamic

Dynamic imports through `React.lazy` have better support in React 18. Previously, Next.js supported dynamic imports internally without requiring `Suspense` or `React.lazy`. Now to embrace the official APIs on the React side, we provide you with `options.suspense` in `next/dynamic`.

```jsx
import dynamic from 'next/dynamic'
import { lazy, Suspense } from 'react'

import Content from '../components/content'

> // These two ways are identical:

Reviewer 2: Not strictly identical, as `React.lazy` doesn't do any preloading. Might be worth suggesting that you continue using `next/dynamic` for now for performance?

Author: When we enable `{ suspense: true }` it's using `React.lazy` and doesn't do preloading I think?

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see the issue -- we just haven't implemented the preloading yet, but we should. Otherwise there's no reason to have the `{ suspense: true }` option instead of just recommending that people use `React.lazy` instead.

Reviewer 3: The need for `{suspense: true}` makes it feel second-class. Do we plan to flip the default at some point in the future?

Reviewer 2: The issue is that currently that would be a breaking change without an incremental upgrade path: your application using `next/dynamic` would break when upgrading to React 18 unless you add suspense boundaries first, but you can't add suspense boundaries until you upgrade to React 18. It also changes the semantics a bit, since pre-Suspense, the loading state is associated with the `next/dynamic` component, rather than the parent.

Changing the default in the future is a possibility, but it's likely a major version away. Some shorter term options might be:
* If we could detect that we're rendering inside a `<Suspense>` boundary, we could assume it's intentional
* If we could somehow port the preloading behavior to `React.lazy`, we could push users toward that instead

Reviewer 2: It occurred to me that with #23304 and #23267 this might not be a breaking change though, if the transition semantics apply to `root.render()` as well...

Reviewer 2: I think what we could theoretically do is use suspense by default during SSR and initial hydration if you're using React>=18, since that behavior shouldn't change.

For client-side navigations that would still be at risk of suspending, we could render the legacy non-Suspense based fallback that you provide with `next/dynamic`, and then also warn that you should add a suspense boundary and move your fallback there instead.

Let me think about it some more.

Reviewer 2: Just noticed that https://github.com/facebook/react/pull/23304 does in fact change the behavior for `root.render(...)` as long as it's not wrapped in `flushSync`. So yeah, it would probably make sense to make this change.

Thanks for flagging @gaearon

const Profile = dynamic(() => import('./profile'), { suspense: true })
const Footer = lazy(() => import('./footer'))

export default function Home() {
  return (
    <div>
      <Suspense fallback={<Spinner />}>
        {/* A component that uses Suspense */}
        <Content />
      </Suspense>
      <Suspense fallback={<Spinner />}>
        <Profile />
      </Suspense>
      <Suspense fallback={<Spinner />}>
        <Footer />
      </Suspense>
    </div>
  )
}
```

> Check out [next/streaming](/docs/api-reference/next/streaming.md) for more details for building Next.js apps in streaming SSR mode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check out [`next/streaming`](/docs/api-reference/next/streaming.md) for more details on building Next.js apps in streaming SSR mode.
```

## Important Notes

#### `next/head` and `next/script`

> Using resource tags (e.g. scripts or stylesheets) in `next/head` won't work as intended with streaming, as the loading order and timing of `next/head` tags can no longer be guaranteed once you add Suspense boundaries. For this reason, we suggest moving resource tags to `next/script` with the `afterInteractive` or `lazyOnload` strategy, or the `_document`. For similar reasons, we suggest migrating `next/script` instances with the `beforeInteractive` strategy to the `_document` as well.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using resource tags (e.g. scripts or stylesheets) in `next/head` won't work as intended with streaming, as the loading order and timing of `next/head` tags can no longer be guaranteed once you add Suspense boundaries. We suggest moving resource tags to `next/script` with the `afterInteractive` or `lazyOnload` strategy, or to `_document`. For similar reasons, we also suggest migrating `next/script` instances with the `beforeInteractive` strategy to `_document`.
```

#### Data Fetching

> Currently, data fetching within `Suspense` boundaries on the server side is not fully supported, which could lead to mismatching between server and client. In the short-term, please don't try data fetching within `Suspense`.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be worth adding a caveat to the main React 18 doc about using **any** existing (i.e. pre-React 18) suspense libraries, _especially_ if you're relying on a library like `react-ssr-prepass`. This might not apply to many Next.js users though, unsure.

#### Styling

> The Next.js team is still working on support for styled-jsx and CSS modules in streaming SSR. Please stay tuned for updates!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Next.js team is working on support for `styled-jsx` and CSS modules in streaming SSR. Stay tuned for updates.
```

## Enable Streaming SSR

Enabling streaming SSR means React renders your components into streams and the client continues receiving updates from these streams even after the initial SSR response is sent. In other words, when any suspended components resolve down the line, they are rendered on the server and streamed to the client. With this strategy, the app can start emitting HTML even before all the data is ready, improving your app's loading performance. As an added bonus, in streaming SSR mode, the client will also use selective hydration strategy to prioritize component hydration which based on user interaction.

To enable streaming SSR, set the experimental option `runtime` to either `'nodejs'` or `'edge'`:

```jsx
// next.config.js
module.exports = {
  experimental: {
    runtime: 'nodejs',
  },
}
```

> This option determines the environment that streaming SSR will be happening. When setting to `'edge'`, the server will be running entirely in the [Edge Runtime](https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/edge-runtime).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option determines the environment in which streaming SSR will be happening. When setting to `'edge'`, the server will be running entirely in the [Edge Runtime](https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/edge-runtime).
```
